

History of Haven
Travel into and out of Haven has always been 'funny'

First wave - Gnomes
8/30/1491 DR Haven discovered accidentally by an anonymous Gnome Wizard. When he tried to return home he instead brought his entire Gnome community of about 231 individuals to Haven. After that they found it impossible to leave. Attempts at creating a gate or portal would fail. Those attempting to plane shift were never heard from again. After a few months they started having some successes, but the gates would open up to random, uninhabitable worlds. At this point a very hard winter was setting in.

Second wave - Danarians
01/10/1492 DR What food stuffs the Gnomes gathered in the fall were running out. Gnomes aren't considered the best hunters and their efforts here were less than encouraging. At this time the Gnomes managed to open a portal to the fabled city of Danar, or at least what was left of it. Danar was powerful, walled metropolis on the Sword Coast when the SpellPlague began. The city vanished overnight. What was not known was that a rift opened up that transported the entire city of Danar to Avernus, the first level of Hell. Hell was having it's own share of problems during the SpellPlague and the weight of Danar caused that section of Avernus to collapse, crashing through Dis and landing in ruins in Minauros, the third level of Hell where any sort of gate travel was impossible. Of the 46,000 resident, an estimated 800 survived the Fall and more than a century later a little over 400 of their decedents remained when the Gnomes found them. There was a quick debate as to which location would give the best chances of survival. Despite the problems with Haven, the alternative was in fact Hell. A battle ensued for control of the gate as a significant portion of Hell's population descended on Danar, but almost everyone made it through before the gate closed. The winter continued to deepen. The death toll that first winter was high, but would have been much worse had it not been for the Danarians who brought with them quite considerable survival skills.

The First Spring
03/21/1492 DR In all 146 people died that winter and no winter since has been nearly that severe. Spring had begun. Hunting was becoming fruitful, as was foraging. The Gnome and Danarians mages were starting to understand a little of Haven's strange planar travel problem. At the urging of many of the Danarians the settlement began building the first wall around the settlement. More than that they were building a home, a home paid for in the lives of so many of their loved ones. The name they chose for this place was what the Danarians had been calling it since their arrival.

Third Wave - Adventurers
7/16/1493 DR The Wizards of Haven finally find a way to compensate for the erratic effects Haven has on planar travel. Their first stop is the Gnome's original community, only to find it taken over by others, an odd assortment of Sylvan creatures and hardly a Gnome among them. All their possessions gone. The only home they had to go back to now was Haven. Their next stop was the Waterdeep marketplace. When the Gnomes were first transported to Haven they had only what was on them at the time. Gnomes are ingenious, but still there are limits to what you can do with sticks, stones and spiderwebs. The Danarians had only a short time during the Evacuation, but brought what they could. They mostly worked with iron, steel and leather, crafts the Gnomes took up with some trepidation so the markets at Waterdeep represented an incredible opportunity. The Gnomes, with wide-eyed and bewildered Danarians in tow, fanned out through the various shops and stands in search of things they had been so long without, brass and the tools to work it, tools and materials for carpentry, weaving and just general tinkering. The Gnomes didn't have much money. The Danarians brought some gold with them from Hell and were shrewd negotiators. While the Gnomes tend to be tight lipped around strangers, Danarians talk. It wasn't long before the marketplace was filled with stories of a strange new world, an uninhibited wilderness, a world that could lead to new and inaccessible worlds beyond imagination. Soon people were offering coin, barter or service to go there. They were all Adventurers in a sense, some looking for fame and fortune, some looking for a new life. It included among them Adventurers like Thoradin Kolar, Simon Hallmar and Wizards like Hendor Holbart, Cassandra and Mykazhin Longreen.

The Tearing of Haven
5/31/1495 DR The population of Haven rose dramatically. The wooden, palade wall was taken down and used in other buildings. The Danarians, with the addition of many Dwarven craftspeople erected the stone wall expanding the size of the settlement. This is when most of the current building were built. Hendor Holbart constructed a Wizards tower near the top of a lone mountain three days south of Haven. At the peak he build a Teleportation Circle to test out his latest theories on the causes and solution to Haven planar travel problem. There is no one around who knows exactly what happened next. There was a light from the south that temporarily blinded many in Haven and a roar like all the thunder throughout time all at once. The ground shook, some buildings and parts of the new wall collapsed. Many were killed or injured. Nowadays, three days south of Haven there is a deep lake the locals call Mt Holbart. Over the years the rivers that now run into it have populated it with a number of fish species. There's been talk of building a fishing village there but since nobody knows where the mountain went and when or if it'll ever return the idea's never gotten much traction. The effects on the demiplane of Haven were severe. Rifts would open up, swallowing people, never to be seen again. Others were dropped in from various other worlds. There is a sinkhole that somehow opened up into the Underdark. The self-appointed Mages Triumvirate announced temporary restrictions on much of the use of Magic as they endeavored to repair some of the damage. Some suspect that things were released into Haven that never should have been.

The Present
6/18/1497 DR Major planar travel is still heavily restricted but most of the restrictions on Magic have been lifted. Random rifts are still occurring but at a drastically reduced rate. One odd phenomenon reported by some who've been taken is that after spending weeks or months on this other world, a rift will open up, seemingly to come after them, even if they try to avoid it, swallow them up and deposit them back in Haven. No one has been able to explain this. Otherwise life is slowly returning to normal for the settlement of Haven.

Whatever normal is.
